title: Build and Design software with Empathy
date: July 6th, 2018
slug: build-and-design-software-with-empathy
category: User Interface + User Experience
summary: Can seeing things from another's perspective create empathy and help solve technical challenges?

Recently, I've started reading this book named [Designing For
Emotion](https://abookapart.com/products/designing-for-emotion) by
[Aarron Walter](http://aarronwalter.com/) and I've made it a point to
read it during my free time and so far I have completed three chapters
of the book.

In the first chapter of the book, I found a really interesting sentence,
written by the author:

> Keep in mind that ignoring human needs is not a history we are doomed
> to repeat. Through our designs, we can see and connect with other
> human beings.

Do you think a good software builds strong connections with other human
beings? Well, we have good examples like Facebook, Google, Netflix, and
Microsoft are proof that they have a massive pool of audience who likes
to use their products on a daily basis.

In this article, I will share some of my thoughts on how empathy can be
used to build and design powerful applications.

## User Interface Matters

To any user, whatever is displayed on the application matters the most,
in this case, it's the ***User Interface*** of an application. If it
doesn't allow a user to perform their desired task, it will end up in
their Recycle Bin.

<figure>
    <img src="https://cdn.cultofmac.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Ping-780x604.jpg"/>
    <figcaption>
        Fig. 1: Apple's Ping
    </figcaption>
</figure>

There are many examples in the book and one of the examples is about
***Apple's Ping*** (refer to Fig. 1), which was an attempt in creating a
social network on ***iTunes*** but it turned out to be unsuccessful as
users learned that they weren't able to share songs on Facebook or
Twitter and it lacked basic features. As a result, users didn't come
back to it again.

In my opinion, a good user interface should be relatively easy to use
and be more reliable in terms of pagespeed or simple and easy navigation
for the user. I mean, think about it, if your user is able to complete
their desired task and that puts a smile on their face, the user will
share their experiences to their friends and you'll get more people to
use your application, thus making your application more powerful.

## A Universal Design

A door knob comes with multiple designs such as rotating knobs and
levers but what matters the most to the people? The design or the
functionality? I personally prefer a lever knob over a rotating knob as
I find it quite annoying. Weird analogy but the point is, it should just
open the door, nothing fancy.

Similarly, when we build our software, by following proper techniques,
we can choose to make it beautiful but also choose to make it accessible
and functional for everybody, at all costs.

## Listen to your users

When building and designing a piece of code, it should and always be for
the people that uses or will use your product. By understanding what's
important to the users, it can help you get to the core of the problem
and surpass technical challenges easily.

This can be achieved by gathering user requirements in the form of
surveys, user feedback and A/B testing. Remember, software is just an
expressive form of bringing your ideas to life and writing code is
building on top of the idea to achieve a certain goal but empathy is the
secret sauce to the success of your application.

## UX is not UI

What's the first thing that comes to your mind when a friend of yours
tells you: *"Hey, I'm working as a UX Designer at UberCoolCorp!"*? Does
he build User Interfaces? Is he a Visual Graphics Designer? Neither,
actually!

User Experience is not about how your application looks but how it feels
and makes it simple and easier to interact with your users. I'd like to
share an interesting quote from Usabilla's UX Expert, Erik Flowers:

> UX is the intangible design of a strategy that brings us to a
> solution.

User Experience encompasses a lot of elements such as Information
Architecture, Interaction Design, Usability, Product Design and so on.
Below is a picture for your reference about why User Experience is not
User Interface:

<figure>
    <img src="http://www.uxisnotui.com/downloads/with-title.png"/>
    <figcaption>
        Fig. 2: How UX wants to be seen.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

Although, it does have a lot of elements, UI is a huge part of the
design process because strong visual aesthetics are still essential in
UX, which is also one of the aspects of your user's interactions with
the application.

## Progressive Enhancement

A strategy that is known to take you on journey from simplicity to
complexity. It's about starting off with a strong, practical foundation
and then building on top of it. It's easier to maintain and make small
yet incremental changes, renders the application to be more robust and
it works for all users.

## Conclusion

Well, I'm sure there a lot of elements to this topic but I thought of
highlighting some of the most important parts of building and designing
software with empathy. As engineers or developers, it is our job to
ensure that our final product is usable and accessible to our end-user.

Hope you liked reading this article!

Stay tuned for more!

## Extras

+ [Empathy is not a soft skill. It's a superpower.](https://medium.com/design-ibm/empathy-is-not-a-soft-skill-its-a-superpower-81f11e32201e)
+ [How Empathy can be a Software Developer's superpower](https://simpleprogrammer.com/empathy-software-developers/)

